     Even now, I routinely wake up with the sense that something has been irretrievably lost.
This morning I am going through stacks of envelopes, opening small floral boxes, unzipping vinyl
over night bags, looking into purses I haven't carried for years. Laying hands on every letter and
photograph I could possibly wish to recall except for the one I am looking for. I would recognize
it if I saw it, though I am not sure exactly when it was written, where exactly it was posted from,
what pictures are on the stamps. Loons, possibly, which mate for life. Or leaves, which over time
reduce themselves to compost. Letters post marked from my own city to my own city, the various
lodging houses where you camped out temporarily until you moved out permanently. I would
recognize your hand writing of course, careless, loping, back handed, Scandanavian looking with
the dots anticipating the i's several characters too soon. I would skim through your humourous
middle aged complaints and your stories of mis identified bones until I found it, the premonition,
the confession.
<P>
     Outside the morning is cold and bright like a kitchen appliance. It is what certain people
would call a lovely morning, the mountains are as coolly clear and unfamiliar as a postcard of this
my own city. But I am still in my red dressing gown our chilly dusty room, too full of boxes and
papers and tired looking mismatched furniture. Douglas and I really never decided whether this
was to be living room or the master bedroom. There is a black and white television which I can
reach from the bed, and a tweedy orange chesterfield along the opposite wall which is papered
floral and blue. Douglas has gone to put up insulation somewhere on the North Shore. I couldn't
be further away from that.
<P>  I have realized that everything about you is flammable. I have imagined you lying in a
greyúDouglas would not if I were to say the same sort of thing of him. He says I am unflattering.
He means I am unhappy. If I were to murmur my vague dissatisfaction with waking up every
morning to the same face, my face in the mirror while other things like the dining room rug and
the bookshelves swell and gather dust, slowly advancing like a forest, he would stand behind me,
shaving, and say that I could be thankful if I didn't show my age. This would neither be true nor
what I meant. I would have meant that it is ridiculous and rude to be confronted with the same
face day after day as though one were the same person now that one was ten years ago, or
twenty. Perhaps I am. And I  do   show my age, Douglas, I  do   notice how much more I
resemble my own mother now than I did in a previous life. And yet the face is the same, or else
changes so gradually I hardly notice it while everything else gathers perceptible dust or is
accumulated in boxes marked with black felt. 
<P>  Because I wake up with Douglas, my daily inventory mostly touches him. The red
corduroy dressing gown was his Christmas gift from two years ago, the Niagara Falls ashtray was
bought to commemorate our ridiculous perfunctory excursion to the place. As well as the gag,
which Douglas keeps running about our basement sink, mine and Douglas' basement sink, the
pipes of which perenially burst and cause a dark stain to spread beneath the brown low pile carpet
like a dirty puddle beneath a layer of ice. It is certainly no cascade it seems to me, except perhaps
initially when the pipes burst in the middle of the night and no one is there to see them. I
experience it only as a sopping spreading stain discovered in the morning. I peel back the carpet
and sweep the water out the back door, let it dry, sprinkle baking soda, sweep again, cover it up.
Douglas repairs the pipes cheerfully, purposefully, a comfortable annual event like decorating the
tree or an anniversary waltz but the smell lingers year round.    
<P>  With you it was the pilot light in the furnace going out. Our historical gags, if we had had
them, if we had pretended to care about things which did not function properly, would have
concerned mastodons and creeping glacial masses forcing us back to the primitive warmth of our
bed, playful, squealing, mock fighting, excited. All our life together, the successful part of our
lifeúcould go to hell for all we pretended to care.  But at least you Richard would have been able
to tell me whether or not the same water, the very same molecules, plummet over the Falls only
once and for all time or whether they follow some circuitous route undergound and back in a loop
to fall again and again incessantly .   It is possible that the conventional portrait of Niagara Falls,
like the one at the bottom of the ashtray always appearing rudely and humourously the same, is in
fact entirely accurate. 
<P>  Whenever I am in one of my panics about some unavoidable mishap, or even one which
could have been avoided such as the loss of Douglas' wedding ring at the Toronto Greyhound
station or the death of people to whom I have neglected to write, Douglas after a respectful
interval, will shrug his shoulders or press mine tightly between his large, unfailing hands    Water
under the bridge, Dolores.  This he says kindly and means it kindly, but his short sightedness
makes me quietly furious and embarrassed for him. As though the features of a life could be
washed out and left abandoned like terminal morrain. As though a lost thing ceases to have being
simply because it is lost.
<P>  Douglas' son is more interested in such things than is Douglas. He comes into the kitchen
with a modest stack of photo albums and spreads them out on the table, offering them to me like a
pleased housecat depositing a mangled bird at my feet. 
<P>  "Is that you, Dolores? How  old   are you there? That's Richard, right?"
<P>  Richard and I are standing in front of a camel. Richard has one hand on the animal's neck
as though it were a great salmon he had caught. His shadow almost eclipses the small dark man
who stands on the sidelines holding the reigns, waiting for Richard to open his billfold and pay
him for the ride. I am wearing a preposterous hat, a safari hat, a present from Richard. 
<P>  "I suppose I'm about 19 there," I say, but surely I was older. I'm trying to apologize for
the preposterous earnestness of the hat. I squint at the photo falsely, as though I can barely
recognize it. Surely I was at least twenty two, but still wholly enthralled laughing too nervously at
his mistakes, noticing them less but more than anyone else. "And that's Richard, yes he was thirtyú<P>   Richard looks paunchy and red faced but not unattractive. I would prefer Douglas' son to
imagine Richard as having been an attractive man, I don't know why. Perhaps so that it might
come up sometime in conversation between Trevor and his father that my previous husband had
been an attractive man. I would never point this out to Douglas myself of course, but I might
allow Trevor to say it for me. This is how I am unkind to Douglas, in a quietly indirect way,
which unkindness seems to be a direct result of his dissimilarity to Richard. And yet I am entirely
grateful for the dissimilarity, it seems to me that I married him for that. His large unfailing hands, 
responsible, oblivious, lacking both memory and foresight but entirely capable of maintenance. 
<P>  "Is this from when he found the skull?" 
<P>  Trevor knows about the famous skull, alas. There was a hologram of it on the front cover
of a glossy colour photo magazine concerned with the global environment. Douglas still renews
our subscription every year as a Christmas gift to Trevor, an offering to me.   I wish I could tell
him, yes Trevor I was there when Richard unearthed the magic skull, when he brushed the grainy
sleep from its ancient eye sockets and held it aloft, musing theatrically upon the ragged jaw from
which tender lips once had hung. Poor Richard. 
<P>  "No Trevor, that was in Mongolia. We were already divorced. Egypt was really only
Richard escorting a group of archeology students on an international field trip." I realize as I say
this how unkind I have become to Trevor as well as to Douglas.
<P>  "Didn't he do a dig?"
<P>  " Didn't he do a dig?   Yes, I suppose Richard did do a dig. He dug up mostly kitchen
utensils, some dolls I think, some bits of clay pots..."
<P>  I didn't finish telling Trevor about Egypt, he had heard the story before anyway various
versions of it no doubt. I think it was the fragility of  clay pots.  I thought of tea sets and elderly
ladies baking pies. I thought of my sister which made me not wish to continue. I was caught
suspended and felt Trevor watching my throat as it trembled, the dwindling chord of some silvery
music I didn't suppose he would listen to. I'm certain it was this    suspense    which he wasú5
pTrevor seems to be almost as in love with Richard as I was and for similar reasons though
they've probably never met. Certainly they've never met. Trevor apologizes for Douglas his father
in tiny secret ways, like bringing me the photo albums, bringing me drinks, reading books which I
have read and which Douglas has not, nursing my melancholy. But Trevor is mistaken there. I am
grateful to Douglas, I am accustomed to and soothed by him. 
<P>  When we moved into this house, just before Trevor came to live with us, the walls had
been excessively pock marked with nail holes and putty stains where pictures and shelves had
been hung by the previous tenants. There were so many holes that I could most reconstruct in my
mind the previous interior decor. Douglas had patiently filled in all the holes with plaster,
smoothly and evenly, and repainted most of the rooms except for the bedroom because I once had
said the blue floral paper looked like the Falls seen quickly through the slats of a barrel. Douglas
thought this was smart, anything about the Falls seemed smart to him or dependably clever
because the Falls are so huge and so easily recognized. The Falls are to Douglas like an inside
joke which everybody knows. There is no risk of being excluded. 
<P>  So Douglas repainted all the rooms except the bedroom which now by contrast resembles
my dusty blue Niagara ashtray, obscenely set down upon an otherwise eggshell white counter top.
The other rooms look clean and uninhabited, I can scarcely recall where the holes were at all. 
<P>  Trevor brings me a gin tonic and then goes up to his room.
<P>  Egypt. There had been a wedding parade along the river, with hired musicians in red
jackets like ushers. We had followed the parade to catch a glimpse of the bride "Look, Richard!
There she is! Or do you think that's her?" I might have actually said that, as though excited to
discover something exotic and mysterious about being a bride. There were several women I
thought could have been her, I didn't know a thing about Egyptian bridal costumes. I spent much
of the time wandering in the bazaars, I visited the excavation site once or twice, a young wife, I
chatted with the students and asked whatever questions I supposed they would be able to
answer.úskier and had fallen. It was quite dramatic. Richard got an Egyptian cast which looked
like any other cast really. But when we got back home, the university newsletter printed an article
with a picture of Richard looking like a proud and wounded soldier. 
<P>  But in truth Richard had been required to fill out the same application forms as the
students had, and he had paid the same fees which included the hotel but not meals. I had been
slightly disillusioned to learn that he and his 'Egyptian correspondent' had not even met before
Cairo, I saw them shake hands in the lobby of the  Hotel Ibis   as polite embarrassed strangers. I
had been envisioning them as old colleagues of course, reunited after years, delighted at the
opportunity to finally descend together into the earth and rattle ancient bones. I have wondered
since then if Richard had been chosen for the trip primarily because he was one of the only faculty
members who did not have children at home to support.
<P>  I drank Trevor's gin tonic standing at the kitchen window, watching the neighbour scrape
ice from his windscreen with a plastic shovel. Then I refilled the glass and carried it into the
bedroom. Small boxes and envelopes were still cast about on the bed, on the dresser, some on the
floor. The space heater had been left on, the smell of heated dust and cold coffee. I took off my
dressing gown and sat down on the bed. The mirror over the dresser is too high for me to catch a
full reflection of myself from this position. I could only see my puzzled colourless face, like a face
reflected in the mirrored side board of a dining booth seen over the shoulder of somebody else. I
knew that below the frame of the mirror my body was naked, tired, soft. I put on my
dressingªgown again and lay down on the bed.
<P>  It is obvious when someone is well suited to being looked at and Richard was. I don't have
any charming stories about when this began, piano recitals when he was six or anything like that. I
had seen him teach and seen him at parties and knew that it was so. He would grin in an ironic,
bemused way when students asked him questions, female students, he would drawl his replies
over centuries of dead and buried bones as though he had been there himself to see them
committed to dust. The irony was supposed to be his seeming to be much older and more
experienced than heúAmerican dollars possessing some indevaluable currency despite connotations
of coarseness.
<P>  In the early days we pretended to revel in voluptuous poverty. We read  Down and Out in
Paris and London,  and you smeared shoe polish on your ankles in lieu of socks as though it were
socks that we could not afford. My type writer would collect dust quite happily in a corner, I
believed that those lost evenings would eventually resurface like sapphires to be reset and
polished later on. The most beautiful things to us then were things which were theatrically
saddened by time. We scoured second hand shops for antique baby carriages, taxidermy raccoons,
rare and yellowed books, for a song. 
<P>  I sat across from you in a booth at the bus station diner in Kelowna, it was the first time
you expressed any concern for my sake that I was not writing. We did not get back on the bus but
stayed in the local motel for three nights in a row, with the idea that we would not leave until I
had completed a story. You phoned to cancel your engagement in Calgary as though you could
afford to do that. Of course I still did not write. How could I? But perhaps there is no need for
writers to lead exquisite depraved scintillating lives after all. Perhaps no one ultimately cares how
many lovers you've had or how much you drink or whether you are dying of a beautiful disease.
Or maybe it's simply I who never really cared about these things. You said that nothing really
matters until after it is dead. 
<P>  Richard would be an excellent subject for biography, not because his life has been any
more remarkable than anyone else's really, but because of his talent for being looked at. I suppose
I did love him for this.
<P>  I took off my dressing gown again and put on a green turtle neck, a brown plaid skirt, the
silver thistle pendant Douglas had given me some anniversary ago. In the mirror I brushed my hair
up from my temples with my fingers, trying to do it briskly like an actress. The same face. I put on
lipstick and boots and left the house.  
<P>  I thought about visiting my sister, who now lives in a mustard yellow duplex above a paint
store at 14th and Fraser. There is still a piano in her apartment, now covered up with doilies
andúan extravagant angle like a hoop skirt. On her kitchen table is the sewing machine at which
she perenially sits. I envision her sitting bent over some meticulous work involving her fingers, the
tension of strings, and her eyesight which is failing prematurely. I think of her repentently playing
the church organ behind some marroon robed choir or sewing rosettes to someone else's bridal
train. Isabel has collected the most wonderful and various supply of canned food I have ever seen,
stacked in her kitchen cupboards like decorative tiles although she lives alone. Over the coming
weeks she will go through them all and arrange Christmas hampers for local church charities.
<P>  My sister does not speak about Richard. She speaks about funerals generally, how she has
been to two this week, how she has baked a lemon loaf for the luncheon held by the Ladies'
Auxiliary following one of the services. "There never seems to be an end to funerals," she says
tiredly, as though she might as easily have said "There never seems to be an end to baking lemon
loaves."   
<P>  "Other than that, oh well I've been doing various things I guess, there was the  Rebeccas' 
 supper, I made a salmon pie for that, oh and I guess I drove Marion Gunther downtown for her
eye appointment." Isabel touches the back of her head, touches her hair, which is now short,
permed and light wispy brown. "She has cataracts,  in both eyes,   imagine."
<P>  "You shouldn't be driving at all Isabel, with your eyes," I have often told her. "Why can't
Mrs.Gunther take a cab? I wouldn't do her any good if you were both killed in a car accident
would it, the blind leading the blind."
<P>  "I'm  not   blind, either. Besides, well, actually it is a blessing to have Marion or else I
would have had  another   funeral to go to, the same after noon   imagine. Mr.Drummond, poor
man, all the way out in Burnaby."
<P>  Isabel will not let me believe that she ever reflects on these things that she does or has
done except to punctuate her sentences with that word  imagine.   I don't know what I am meant
to imagine if it is not what she says. I only find myself growing peevish at this dishonesty, my own
dishonesty, when in truth we both could be split open like piá–áatas and a thousand
reprimandsúunderstood the attraction of these weekly  Rebeccas   meetings, for instance    from
her own reports, it seems to be a sort of cult for elderly ladies, a feminine equivalent of The
Masons    for which she must weekly borrow a white skirt and blouse from Mrs.Gunther and
memorize peculiar ceremonial greetings. I know perfectly well that Isabel has an excellent
memory, she claims this is only true for poetry and recipes. Other people's words, what other
people have made.
<P>  "Oh, I could never  write   a poem or a story like you do Dolores," she tells me. "Me,
imagine! I haven't got the first clue what I would write about, I really don't. I haven't had that sort
of life."  What   sort of life, Isabel? I have wanted to say. Does she mean her own life? I have
wondered the same thing about myself.
<P>  It used to be that we could sit together quite happily on the porch of the house on Clarke
street, in folding lawn chairs. Richard would be there too of course, it was our house, mine and
Richard's, Isabel only coming to stay after failing her nursing exams. But we would sit on the
porch in the evening, the three of us, and listen to Richard tell stories about Egypt and bones or
Isabel would sometimes recite the various poems she'd made a point of memorizing for whatever
reason, perhaps in school. We all would know them, like easy songs. Richard would make
ginªtonics, she would sip hers sparingly, deceptively, while we got rather drunk in the purple
dark. We.   In fact I had begun to no longer think of Richard and myself in terms of being a single
artifact, which change I had thought greatly improved things between us. It was an easy,
balanced we   I thought,   like two leonine bookends with volumes between. I lay back in my
lawnªchair, my gin tonic in one hand, the other resting consciously on Richard's thigh. 
<P>  Isabel seemed to be another artifact unto herself. I was concerned for her as I would have
been for a daughter. Her offerings were gentle, tentative, she would hold up one gracefully
curving finger as she recited as though following tinily written words on a page.  
<BLOCKQUOTE>
     My little horse must think it queer<BR>
     to stop without a farmhouse near<BR>
     between the wood and frozen lake<BR>
</BLOCKQUOTE>
<P>
I tried to draw my sister into our goings on, encouraged her to grow her hair long enough
to wear in the style that was fashionable then, shoulder length and flipped up at the ends like
fishªtails. Isabel wore terrible glasses with thick black frames which entirely monopolized her
face.
<P>  "Isabel has quite nice legs. She should wear her skirts shorter," I would say to Richard.
<P>  "Too muscular. Too athletic."
     This was true. Although Isabel was never athletic, her body seemed to be held in solid
tension, the muscles of her calves like the dormant nest of elastic bands at the centre of a golf ball.
<P>  "She should grow her hair."
<P>  "She does have hair growing. On her face."
<P>  "What a mean thing to say."
<P>  "I didn't pass judgement on it, I stated a fact."
<P>  This was also fact. Isabel had a soft down growing in front of her ears, at the corners of
her mouth. She had the face of a fair, freckled twelve year old boy. Alert, bony in a delicate way,
often embarrassed. There is something very attractive about Isabel, I would often say, and
Richard would say yes, she was just the sort of woman about whom other women would say there
was something attractive. And why did they say that? he asked. Because she was no threat. 
<P>  No threat.
<P>  Why is it a surprise to find that people other than ourselves are able to tell lies?  
<P>  When Richard's colleagues came for drinks, I would keep one eye open for prospective
suitors, men who were as shy, ingenuous, invisible as Isabel. Men who, like Douglas, would be
content to spend evenings hunched over textbook or drainpipe or body of woman whose present
dishevelment could occupy all of their cautious, myopic attention. There were several such men,
but they never seemed to speak to Isabel nor Isabel to them, each standing against opposite walls
sipping their drinks self consciously like teenagers at a prom. Isabel wore pink, a pink polyester
suit with ruffled sleeves, and peered out at the gathering like a puzzled owl from behind her
glasses.úI would be there, in my dark blue Tunisian caftan with silver embroidery at the throat,
sweeping by with a tray of drinks or sausage rolls yet I would still sometimes envision myself as a
sort of accessory, in the context of these gatherings at least.   For the most part, I pretended not
to recognize the deep, familial trench I so easily fell into. But neither was I any longer an
accessory really, in the pliable, domestic sense of a lamp or a chesterfield or that so ridiculous hat
Richard had bought me in Egypt which I so ridiculously had worn. We were both proud yes, and
we fought, about Isabel, about the pilot light, about whether or not to have a child, about money.
I would often stay at home and read articles in women's magazines. Case histories about stay
atªhome wives and jealousies and restlessness of various types. When my faith was intact and
riding high I would skip over these lessons superstitiously, when it was low, and very low, and
gone, I read them for comfort because it is a comfort to discover that one's own case holds no
particular agony, only some shopworn, recognizable pain.  
<P>  I admit, I had once thought that if it were to be either of us, it would have been me. After
all I was at home while he was away at the university or very occasionally at a dig, and Isabel kept
to herself, so I thought. I had the whole day to do with what I wanted, did I not? You Richard,
were too much in the sun, I had thought. I didn't think your particular entrenchment offered such
convenient escape routes, such secretive release.    
<P>  Eventually I unburied my typewriter again, began writing articles for various women's
magazines, used a different name. I thought you would have appreciated that, sincerely. Isabel
would sometimes come down in the morning, and make herself a cup of coffee in our tiny kitchen.
I would ask if she wanted any brandy in it and she would reluctantly take just a little, for her
throat.
<P>   "Brr r!   How can you  stand   it? If there was the space for your typewriter up in my
room,
well, I'd just let you move right in there with me, I really would." 
<P>  Isabel would be perched on the edge of the bed, rubbing her stocking feet together
selfªconsciously, sipping her second coffee and brandy. ú   Swinging a cat had been Richard's
expression. Richard woke up early every morning
because, according to him, there was not enough room in our kitchen to swing a cat if anyone else
was in there with him. Later, there seemed to be not enough room in the entire house to swing a
cat
so Richard spent more and more time working in his office. I never phoned him there to check,
why should I have? I would have refused to do it, even had I known.
<P>  Richard and Isabel swinging a cat. Richard and Isabel going through my closet to find a
nice dress that was small enough to fit her, so she would look pretty and eligible at our next party.
Richard taking Isabel to the hippodrome to get her out of my hair   for the day, he said. Richard
and
Isabel offering to move my typewriter up into Isabel's room so that I could work evenings in
peace. Richard and Isabel being very, very quiet, for my sake. All of this with my consent, of
course, but listen to the lies, the half lies, the absurdities. 

 
<P>  I get as far as Isabel's front door before something just sort of bursts, or snaps, and I cover
my mouth with my hand, with my whole arm, to stifle the sob. The howl, amazingly, I never
would have thought. So it can come just like that, and all of a sudden. I realize I had given myself
the three weeks just in case it might, I really thought it would take that long, if it came at all. Plus
one week to get things in order again. Now here it was already, on only the second day. It was
pushing things, I suppose, to come here. I wanted to see what would happen, whether anything
would fall.
<P>  It had not been as awkward as I might have anticipated to get the time off work. I simply
said that I was thinking of taking a trip to the city associated with your name, no questions were
asked, and none will be asked. Everyone at the Museum is at least familiar with you, of course,
some like to speak of having known you well. A few of them, I know, knew you intimately. Only
one of the other custodians, a man my age who has long believed in some tragic untimelyúgesture
with my hand meaning I was tired of something or that some object was floating
downstream. I was not sure what I meant myself, but expected I think rightly that he would
understand. He might have been the one I could have retaliated with, years ago, but you would
have found something to say to make my transgression seem even more disgraceful, more
humiliating, than your own.
<P>  "Surely, Dolores, you could have done better than that."
<P>  "Really, Dolores, you've sold yourself a little cheaply this time."
<P>     There is even a room at the Museum, though not on my floor, which is named after you   
The
Richard Hammett Exhibit of Primitive Art    with an aluminum plaque outside the doorway
bearing
your name and a little blurb about the Mongolian skull. The skull itself is not, and has never been,
part of the exhibit. It had been bought by the American Museum of Natural History in New York
City where it has sat, in its glass case, these last thirteen years, like a expensive impractical gift.


 

















 