                             PRAYERS


Our mother, who prefers to be called Penny, lives along with us, my brother and me, in an old
farmhouse in the beautiful Pointe-Fortune woods.  She brought us here quite a long time ago,
after our father left, to try out life away from the city.  First though, she had to fix the place up. 
Squirrels had made holes in the walls and a person couldn't sleep through a winter night without
freezing to death.  Worse than that, crowds of bats used to get into the house through rotten
places in the roof and fly or flop around us.  We didn't know very much about the woods then
and were always scared that something would go wrong.  Penny kept saying things like:
<P>
<I>  we have no choice . . . , everybody has to start somewhere . . . , hearts heal
     through work . . . , so much for marriage . . . . </I>
<P>
Once she had to hold the kitchen up during an earthquake.  It happened around the time we were
digging out the old foundation, and had to hold up that end of the house with a wooden post to
keep the joists from snapping.  My brother and I shone flashlights down into the hole so she could
crawl in to grab on to the post and keep it from twisting out as the ground shuddered under us. 
Afterwards she said she understood what a man had to go through and that it was no wonder they
ran off a lot of the time.
<P>
I really like it here now.  In the summer the front yard is filled with wild violets and black-eyed
susans, and the apple tree we planted over Heidi gives us at least a dozen apples a year.  Also, our
cats and dogs have a new porch to lie on.  These days if they want to come inside during
thunderstorms or when it snows, we just open the front door, call their names and say, "Come on
. . . ." The air always smells good, and our water is very clean.  Well, it was. . .  Up until
yesterday when I poisoned it by mistake. Penny was mad right away.  She wouldn't even listen to
me explain what's happened.  I never knew she could look so ugly and shout so loudly.  She said
afterwards that it was all about survival and that she couldn't wait for us to finally learn what that
meant.
<P>
I'm sure what I did was all because of my Halloween costume.  My brother and I had been
practising for next week, making a huge mess out of paint, kiddie glue, and toilet paper.  We had
decided to go as a pair of "Its" from "The Addams Family," making long bushy hair out of rolled
paper and sticking it all over the white clothes we's put on underneath.  My brother's turned out
the best.  His hair was shaggier than mine and he stuck a long point on his nose, for no reason,
that made him look like a giant mosquito.  Around here that's about as ugly as you can get.  That,
and the sight of a bat screaming I panic when it's papery wings get caught in the burrs by the old
manure pile.
<P>
Whenever we needed to wash anything, which my brother and I eventually had to do yesterday,
we have to fetch water from a hollowed-out spring near the house.  Since it's the only clean water
we have, there's a whole procedure we have to go through, and we can't make any mistakes.  We
know it off by heart--Penny says it enough times.
<P><I>
     First of all,  you step on the rock. Then you spread the leaves.  Let the "boatman"
     swim away, and the crayfish have their shade.  Leave the sludge nice and still,
     take water from the top.  When you have it, swish it slow, and treat it like cool
     millions.
</I><P>
I couldn't see properly yesterday because of the "It" costume and the "boatmen" were really
stupid, constantly swirling into the bucket.  Sometimes they do this when there are frogs waiting
around to catch them.  Since I don't want to empty the bucket and start over, which is what you
have to do to stop them from ending up far away from home somewhere, I stretched out too far
and fell in.  The water looked so clear, just the way Penny likes it, except for me coming at it with
black and red paper hair flying.  If I'm that ugly next week, I'm going to get a lot of candies,
that's for sure.
<P>
Fortunately the waterhole is wider than it is deep so I didn't go under.  Instead I skinned my legs
and arms which, I guess, filled the water with blood as well as paint, glue and soggy paper.  Just
as I was about to crawl out Penny came around the side of the house to hang up washing.  She'd
done the white load, which takes about six two-bucket trips to the waterhole, and had carefully
arranged it into a crouching shape so nothing would fall.  She looked glad that the washing was
almost done.  Before she saw me everything was quiet except for the scratching sounds she made
hunting through the peg basket for the tight plastic ones; and the slow whine of our old cat, Sexy
Sadie, meowing at the back door in her usual crabby way.  Around me, the water rippled now and
then, washing the paint I'd used to darken my face and hair,  to the sides of the waterhole.  It
made the gray smudges on the surface like scratches on glass, while the toilet paper hair swelled
into lumps of striped mush.  Slowly they floated or sank the way dead mice do when you find
them drowned and slimy in Spring.  The water was filthy, and the "boatmen" shot about on their
thin legs even more frantic than when they end up burning to death in a toilet of pee overnight. 
This close up I could see the crayfish on the bottom, nudging their waxy pink bodies back under
rocks.  Like this, the only thing I could think of doing was to keep sitting in the water and pray
that everything would turn out alright.
<P>
Heidi looked like a mouse when we buried her.  She held her tiny see-through hands together
under her chin, like folded claws, and her face seemed very businesslike for someone born way
too early like she was.  Penny explained the whole procedure to us and that it was for the best
that Heidi had died.
<P><I>
     It was a miscarriage; the bag Heidi was growing in was too hard and shrivelled
     to feed her properly.  Or maybe it was because "the guy" was an alcoholic.  Or
     maybe the oil fumes from the old chainsaw we had back then, were too much for
     the baby and poisoned it.  We don't know for sure whether Heidi was a girl, it was
     too early to tell . . . And out of bad comes good.
</I><P>
I really like Penny.  Not only does she know how to make and fix things but she has the kind of
face that makes you think of a comfortable room.  One with two windows in it, on a white wall,
letting in the blueness of sky and the shade of trees.  Whatever is in the room depends on how she
moves her face or what she says.  When she smiles, a soft carpet unrolls across the floor for her
words to land on and bounce into our ears.  There are candles in the corners of her mouth and her
cheeks are satin cushions around the woodenness of her nose.  I also like watching the way her
hands move.  Like yesterday from the waterhole.  First she's take two pegs, then something out of
the laundry basket.  Whatever it was, she's shake it and feel out its corners, exactly, so everything
came out straight.  When I think of it, she didn't look like someone who was about to, in less than
a minute, about to swoop down from the little platform we made to reach the washline and
scream so loudly that the cats woke up under the Hasta leaves and ran away.  But she did and
that's that, amen.
<P>
First of all she asked me the usual questions which I couldn't answer this time because her face
wouldn't let me.  There was no longer any room left in it, nowhere to stand or sit down.  It
looked hard and shrivelled, dusty, and dark as a low cloud.  From where I was I could see it
trembling; and getting the feeling a heavy door was going to slam soon I crawled out of the water
to get a head start if I needed to run away.  My brother came to help me.  I think he could also tell
Penny meant business.
<P>
Her questions weren't the worst part.  We're used to them, like hearing the beginning music to a
T.V. show.  Also, there's always something happening around here, or somewhere else in the
world, that makes her have to ask
<P><I>
          What the hell . . .?  What the fuck . . .?,
          What the Christ . . .?  What the fucking Christ . . .?
</I><P>
While she went on like this, you could tell she still saw things around her like the bright green of
the lawn we planted in the summer, the last apple on Heidi's tree, and the white load flapping in
the breeze.  Even during what she calls the perspective stuff:
<P><I>
          You would think after all this time . . .,
          O.K. let me get this right . . .,
          Of all the things I've ever asked you . . .,
</I><P>
She still noticed the dogs barking at the big woodpecker that recently came to live in a tree right
outside our house, and our new pile of kindling sticks by the front steps.  But this time she went
on and on until she saw only me.  I knew by the way she fluttered her fingers around her head and
pulled her eyes together that I was sitting right on top of her nose.  A tiny little "it", who was
going to die way too early, starting to feel scared, and covered in slime like a burst mouse.  Her
face was eating the world, pushing away our house and its shiny black shutters.  I was caught in a
small hot room, the sound and smell of a chainsaw going into me, choking on oil and revving up
again.  My own voice came running down my thin thin legs, burning my skin.  I tried to answer
that I wasn't a
<P><I>
          Brainless little bitch.  Oh Christ, a bloody child, you couldn't trust
          as far as you could see in these godforsaken woods.  A fool, a 
          Blonde ditz.  Something on the way out and no wonder.  A white
          wimp, with no ability to survive in her natural state.  A silly twelve
          year-old girl with nothing on her mind but "who likes me and who
          doesn't?"  A biological trick put on this earth to slowly squeeze
          a mother to death with the hydraulic stupidity that moves her
          muscles.  Oh Jesus, a field-day for hormones, starting in to rip open
          her gangly legs so that she couldn't even balance over the water
          that keeps her alive.  An insult to the idea that women could ever make
          it on their own.  A curse, love's tumour, the price of a long-forgotten
          orgasm, a birth more useless than any iffy Heidi . . . 
<I><P>
But suddenly, there was more screaming, just a long meow beginning in me and slipping far into
the woods.  I looked at the waterhole.  There was a cold pink giant sitting in it, swelled up to its
rocky sides.  I wanted to say there were too many cold pink giants in the world, and that I'd fallen
in by mistake but my tongue pulled straight in my mouth, pinned by the corners.  I saw my brother
sitting by the woodpecker's tree, still covered in hair and knocking at it with his long cardboard
nose.  The end was almost flat, beaten in.  He was probably seeing how long he could go before it
fell from his face.  Knowing him, he'd turn it into something scientific and come and tell me about
it to cheer me up.
<P>
"Two hundred and six go's at the tree," he told me later when he found me in the woods.  I'd run
there over the plywood bridge we made, all the way past the dry well, to think up another idea for
Halloween.  "It really took the punches eh?" he asked, breathing so fast that his heartbeats made
his shirt flutter.  I said I guessed so, but I was really trying to decide between a witch and a fairy. 
They were both supposed to do magic tricks.
"By the way, Penny's fixing up the waterhole," he said trying to find a way to balance on a thin
stump.  "She cleaned everything up and put a drum over the spring so the water fills up higher
than before.  You should have heard us smashing out the bottom of the barrel . . . . Now we don't
have to balance on the rock anymore."  That was good news except I was wondering whether I
should look ugly or beautiful next week when my friends and I went trick-or-treating down in the
village.  "She's glad about it all now, you know," he carried on.  "She says,
<P><I>
          She wants you to come home to see how it all turned out . . .
          To come and put on warm clothes,  cause you must be freezing
          to death.  And to forgive and . . . .
</I><P>
Oh, and other stuff . . .I don't know.  She tells me a lot of important things I always forget to
say."  I wanted to laugh because he still had toilet paper stuck to the back of his head, but he was
being so nice to me for a slightly older brother, that I hummed and looked up into the trees
instead.
<P>
Their leaves were all pink and falling fast - - one at a time - - against our faces, into our laps and
hair.  Sometimes they landed wet side down and stuck to us like big Band-aids.  When my brother
spat one of these off his nose and said "So come on, lets go back to the house," I pushed my luck
and said I would, only if he went first and held back the "face-slappers".  Amazingly he did, and
soon we came to the edge of the woods where the side of the house suddenly appears, looking
like the sky rather than pale-blue painted stucco.<P>
The laundry was still flying in the breeze, like flags, and Sexy Sadie had fallen asleep under our
heavy tomato plants.  I saw Penny standing by the waterhole , in wet rubber boots and splashed
clothes.  Her temples were smeared with mud in the places where her bangs always bug her while
she's doing something.  When she saw me pushing through the milkweeds she gave a little wave
and stared at me, for a little while, as if I was someone she'd never seen before.  I went up slowly
to the new drum over the spring and peered in.  It was filled with the most beautiful water ever. 
Penny came and stood close to me and I told her I really liked the new setup.  Even though she
looked happy I was back and that the water was clean again, I didn't go any closer to touch the
new drum or taste the water.  I was still very messy.  My skin and clothes were streaked with a
drying dark red slime, some of it peeling off in scales around my eyes and mouth from laughing at
my brother all the way home.  Out in the open air and sunlight I could feel the rest of it drying,
and pulling my arms and legs together into a tight cocoon - - into the perfect "mummy" costume. 
For Penny's sake, I don't want to take any more chances at the waterhole.  For my sake, I prayed
right there, to find a good way to never make mistakes.  Like Penny's.         