Country Song



<P>	For a couple of years, I taught Cajun cooking in Austin, Texas, which gave me an 
excuse to drive to Louisiana a couple of times a year to buy the ingredients I needed.
<P>	This only happened in the spring, because the first lesson was always crawfish 
(fluskrebs), which are only available at that time of year. I'd drive directly from 
Louisiana to the kitchen I used as a classroom so they would be fresh-they don't keep 
very well. 
<P>	Now, across the street from me lived Ron and Sharon. Ron is a country 
songwriter, but not a very successful one because he has really left-wing politics, and 
that sort of gets in the way. 
<P>	One Monday I was getting ready for my trip. I rented a car, because my own 
wouldn't make it, and I'd just parked it in front of my house when Ron came out. 
"What's with the new car?" he asked, and I explained it to him. "You're going to 
Louisiana?" Sure, I explained: drive down on Monday, get a motel room in Lafayette, 
eat a good meal, see some music if there was any, wake up the next morning and start 
buying supplies as I drove back to Texas. "Man," he said. "I wish I could come along. 
I'm really depressed." Well, I said, why not? I could use some company. He'd been 
driving Sharon nuts hanging around the house, and she was glad to get rid of him, so 
he tossed some stuff in a bag, and we drove off. 
<P>	It's really a pretty boring drive, and it was good having Ron along. He was born 
and raised in Pasadena, a terrible suburb of Houston filled with chemical factories, and 
as we crawled through the Houston traffic, he told me lots of stories about what 
Houston had been like in the '50s. Four hours later, we were in Lafayette, Louisiana. 
<P>	Lafayette's just another big city; the action is out in the countryside. We ate at 
some excellent roadside place, and as we headed back to Lafayette, I saw that my 
friend Mr. D.L. Menard, the Cajun Hank Williams, was playing at a restaurant, so we 
stopped off and caught the last set of his show. He told Ron his story about meeting 
Hank Williams and how Hank had told him how to finish his famous song, "J'ai passé 
devant la porte d'arriere," "I went in by the back door."
<P>	Back at the motel, we had some beer and it was obvious that Ron was feeling 
better. "Man, I can't believe I just talked to somebody who met Hank Williams and got 
songwriting advice from him." The advice was simple: Hank was in his Cadillac and 
pulled into a gas-station where Mr. D.L. was working. "He was my hero, Hank," D.L. 
explained, and it took him a minute to get the courage to speak to him, but he did. He 
told him that he'd written most of a song and didn't know what to do. "Is it a good 
song?" Hank Williams asked him. "I think so," Mr. D.L. said. "Well, hell, boy, finish it!" 
Hank said. "And I went home and that's just what I did," Mr. D.L. said with a grin.
<P>	The next day we got up at 6 so we could drive the back-roads and find someone 
selling crawfish. It had been a good year, and there were lots of them, and they were 
cheap, so that didn't take long. We drove on past the rice-fields and the old honky-
tonks that had been there since the '30s, and in about an hour we were at our last 
stop, a small town called Eunice where my friend Mr. Kermit Lejeune makes sausage 
that's so good I had orders from friends in Texas for some. 
<P>	Lejeune lives back in the swamp, but his house is in the middle of a grove of 
trees. I pulled up in front of the little store he has next door, and inside, I saw he had 
completely renovated it. "Wow, Lejeune, look at this!" I said. "Yeah," he said, "I'm 
selling to lots of restaurants now, doin' okay." 
<P>	But before I could give him my order, one of his neighbors ran in. "Lejeune! Come 
on out here! You gotta see this!" So we walked outside, where there was a fairly new 
Cadillac parked. "You think I should buy this?" the man asked Lejeune. I didn't: the 
paint was beginning to go dull, and when he turned it over, it sounded like there was a 
beer-can stuck somewhere in the engine. "This guy, he wants to sell it to me for 
$1600!" the guy said, and Ron and I just looked in the other direction.
<P>	Pretty soon the guy drove off. "He didn't want to know if I thought he should buy 
that car," Lejeune said, smiling. "It ain't no good, but he's already bought it in his head, 
and couldn't nobody talk him out of it." "Well, Lejeune," I said, "you're doing well 
enough that maybe you should buy yourself a Cadillac." He laughed. "Naw, man, what 
do I want with a damn Cadillac? I got this," and, with his hand, he waved in the 
direction of his neat house, the big garden growing flowers and vegetables, and his 
son, walking out of the smokehouse wth a load of sausage.
<P>	So I bought my supplies and we drove off, and about ten miles down the road, 
Ron grabbed my shoulder. I was surprised and looked over at him. His eyes were full 
of tears. "That man knows what he wants!" he said. "He's living a good life! He knows 
his place on the earth! He's happy, and he knows that's what's important! He's right: 
he doesn't need a Cadillac to show people that."
<P>	"Sounds like that would make a pretty good song, Ron," I said. "Yeah," he said, 
and stayed silent pretty much until we got to Houston. 
<P>	But he never wrote it, although he told me he tried. Maybe he's waiting for Hank 
Williams to pull up in his Cadillac and say "Well hell, boy, finish it!"

<P>
<CENTER>
<P>
<HR WIDTH 50%>
<H3>My Biggest Regret (This Week)</H3></CENTER>

<P>	When you get to my age, you look back on your life and see all sorts of thing you 
should have done differently. I do, anyway. There are the women I maybe should have 
chased a little harder, the women I defnitely shouldn't have chased at all. There are 
things I should have said and things I really shouldn't have said. All sorts of things. I 
have a new biggest regret every week.
<P>	This week, I was thinking about my friend Richard, the punk-rock Chinese 
herbalist, for some reason, and I remembered something that happened because of 
him. 
<P>	Richard was studying herbal medicine and kung fu with a little old man named 
Master Chung in Albany, California. Richard was too poor to pay for his lessons, but 
he was a graphic designer, so he offered to design Master Chung's new studio. He did 
a good job, and when the studio opened, he invited all his friends to see it. 
<P>	Mostly, it was open space, which you need when you're throwing your arms and 
legs around a lot. There were two big rooms. In one, Richard's wife and some other 
Chinese women had set up a big table of Chinese snacks. The other room was bare, 
and we all crowded around its edges, because Master Chung was going to give a solo 
performance. He started at one end of the room, and moved, slowly executing his kung 
fu moves, down to the other end, and then started back. He was 75, but he moved like 
a teenager. Then he picked up two big bamboo poles and went up and down the room 
again. It was beautiful.
<P>	After he was over, the room erupted into applause. We cheered out loud for this 
great old man, and when the applause died down, he thanked us and said "Now we 
eat and get drunk!" Like many kung fu masters, Master Chung thought getting drunk 
was funny.
<P>	So we were eating and drinking, and Master Chung came up to us. My friend 
Michael asked him what he thought about Nixon's having recently made it possible to 
visit China. "It's good," he said. "More people to beat." 
<P>	"At your age, though?" Michael said.
<P>	"Sure! They not expect it from me. And nobody left to beat in America." His eyes 
twinkled and he laughed.
<P>	Suddenly he got serious and turned to me. "You give me this," he said, punching 
me with two fingers on my chest, "for two months. You like what you get." I was 
embarrassed: I couldn't come to Albany three times a week, and I don't know how I 
would have paid for it. "No," I said, "I don't think I can."
<P>	"You can," he said. "You should." And he walked away.
<P>	Maybe I should have. Maybe I could have found a way. He was so good, I wonder 
if it would have made a difference. Did he see something in me he wanted to work 
with? If I'd gone to him, I wonder if I wouldn't have chased some of those women, or 
said some of those things. I wonder if it would have made a difference if I'd gone to 
him. 
<P>	But I didn't. He'd only be about 100 now. I wonder if the offer's still open.

<P>
<CENTER>
<P>
<HR WIDTH 50%>
<H3>
Watching the Sex Pistols Break Up
</H3></CENTER>

<P>	Punk rock came to San Francisco and was a big hit. Each night, the Mabuhay 
Gardens, the punk club, was packed, and at the end of the evening, there would be a 
line of Volvos and Mercedes outside as parents picked up their kids. But at least all 
these rich kids spent money, which meant we got all the good bands touring from 
England and New York, and when the Sex Pistols did their American tour, they booked 
its last date at Winterland.
<P>	Like everybody else, I wanted to go, but, as usual, I didn't have any money. The 
Sex Pistols were on Warner Bros. in the States, so I called my friend who was head of 
the publicity department to see if I could get on the guest list. "There is no guest list," 
he said. "They won't let us have one." 
<P>	"But Bob," I said, "I have to see this show."
<P>	"Yeah, you do," he said. "I'll figure something out." And a couple of days later he 
called to say he'd done it, although I shouldn't tell anybody. 
<P>	It was January, cold and rainy, and for some reason I found myself in San 
Francisco instead of across the Bay where I lived, running around on business. I 
wanted to go back home to change my clothes for the show, because I was wearing 
something I didn't want to get dirty. I was also wearing this big warm bomber jacket 
Capitol Records had sent out last Christmas with "Bob Seger and the Silver Bullet 
Band" written all over the back. I really didn't want to be wearing that to a Sex Pistols 
show. 
<P>	But somehow it got to be 6 o'clock and I still hadn't made it back, and now it was 
too late. I headed to Japan Town and had a big bowl of noodle soup and worried about 
the show. Every thrill-seeker in town would be there. There would be cops. And most 
of the real punk-rockers couldn't get in because they were as poor as I was and there 
was no guest-list. 
<P>	The people at Winterland were as rude as always. "There is no guest list," the 
woman told me, and I said "Yes, but I'm on it." And I was. "You've even got a 
backstage pass," she said. "How'd you manage that?" I didn't know: I hadn't asked for 
one.
<P>	 Just before the Sex Pistols came on, Jerry Pompili, who introduced the bands at 
Winterland, came out and read a list of upcoming shows. When he announced that the 
Jefferson Starship would do five days at the Warfield Theatre next week, I thought a 
riot would start. You'd think he would have known better.
<P>	Well, you know all about the show. It was loud, Sid was stoned, and Johnny said 
"Ever get the feeling you've been cheated?" at the end. I hadn't been; I was on the 
guest list. I'd cheated them.
<P>	I really had no reason to go backstage, but I thought Bob might be there and I 
wanted to thank him, so I went back. I stood around, looking for someone I knew, and 
Malcolm MacLaren and the Sex Pistols swept by in a bunch, and went off to a corner 
to huddle and talk. Still no Bob. Then there was a lot of shouting from where the band 
was, and Johnny stomped out. Still no Bob. 
<P>	Then someone tapped me on the shoulder. I turned around, and there was Steve 
Jones, the guitar-player. He looked like he was looking for a fight. "You like Bob 
Seger, then?" he sneered. I looked him right in the eye. "I like free jackets." He stared 
for a minute, and then he laughed and slapped me on the back. "Right, mate. Cheers."
<P>	I never did find Bob, and the next day I found out why, of course. So thanks, Bob. 
I got to see history for free. 

<P>
<CENTER>
<P>
<HR WIDTH 50%>
<H3>
Getting Breakfast in Oxford, Mississippi
</H3></CENTER>



<P>	A couple of years ago, a publisher asked me to do a book on Chess Records, the 
legendary Chicago blues label, and, although I didn't know much about Chess and 
really don't like Chicago at all, I needed money, so I said yes. 
<P>	I should have been suspicious: there had never been a book on Chess, and, as it 
turned out, there was a reason. Information about it is next to impossible to find. But I 
met this guy named Joel, who worked at the University of Mississippi in Oxford, and 
there, he said, they had a blues library. "If this information is anywhere, it's here. I've 
seen lots of stuff about Chess in our archives," he said, so, since I'd almost spent the 
advance money, I flew to Memphis, rented a car, and drove to Oxford, where I got a 
room at the Holiday Inn.
<P>	I met Joel at the library as it was closing Thursday night. "You can go in first thing 
tomorrow," he said. "There's loads of stuff there. Let's go to Clarksdale." Clarksdale is 
another small city just down the road, and it had been the main city for the Mississippi 
Delta. Lots of famous blues singers, from Robert Johnson to Ike Turner to B.B. King 
started there before moving on to Memphis to get famous. We took back roads, and 
Joel showed me the plantations where Robert Johnson and Muddy Waters had worked 
picking cotton, and then we stopped at a Lebanese restaurant because Joel is a 
vegetarian and can't eat barbeque or catfish, which was what I wanted. 
<P>	Afterwards, we drove down the streets of Clarksdale, and the whole town seemed 
dead. All the blues clubs were closed, but Joel found a tiny bar with a dirt floor where 
he said they played blues. A few women were sitting around drinking malt liquor, which 
is extra-strong beer, out of litre bottles. "Is there blues here tonight?" Joel asked. "Ain't 
nobody gonna play the blues because we all got the blues," a woman told him. "We 
got no money to pay a blues singer." So we went back to Oxford.
<P>	The next morning, I had breakfast at the Holiday Inn. It was terrible. Then I went 
to the University. Joel was right: there was a lot of stuff there. Unfortunately, none of it 
had anything to do with Chess Records. There was B.B. King's record collection, which 
had classical music and Ukranian folk music in it, and there were lots of books and 
magazines, but nothing on Chess. That night we drove up to Memphis and I tried to 
get drunk at the Peabody Hotel, but drinks were real expensive. 
<P>	I didn't want to have breakfast at the Holiday Inn, and there is a famous cafe in 
Oxford where William Faulkner used to hang out, so I decided to go there instead. I 
drove out of the parking lot and across the bridge over the highway, and suddenly I 
saw red lights behind me. I pulled over, and a huge white cop with pink skin came out 
of his police car. 
<P>	"Anything wrong, officer?" I asked.
<P>	"You didn't stop at the stop sign when you came off the highway" he told me.
<P>	"I didn't come off the highway, sir. I came from the Holiday Inn."
<P>	"We saw you. Don't tell us what we saw."
<P>	I handed him my licence and he went back to the car to call it in. In a minute he 
was back. "Why's this car got Tinsee plates?" he asked. 
<P>	"Because I got it in Memphis."
<P>	"This your car?"
<P>	"No, sir, I got it from Avis."
<P>	His eyes narrowed to slits. "Who's he?" I explained that Avis was a car-rental 
company. He looked at me in disbelief. "You sure of that?" I showed him the rental 
papers, and he took them back to his car to show his partner. When he came back he 
had a piece of paper in his hand that said I owed the state of Mississippi $64 for not 
stopping at a stop sign. "You be real careful," he said, and got back in his car and 
drove off.
<P>	I went to the cafe and ordered breakfast. It was terrible. I waited for my thin coffee 
to cool, and thought, if this is Oxford, the intellectual center of Mississippi, what must it 
be like in Clarksdale? No wonder Muddy Waters got on the train and didn't stop until 
he got to Chicago. So I did the same thing. I went back to the Holiday Inn, called Delta 
Airlines, and got a seat on a Texas-bound flight that afternoon.
<P>	A month later, I got a letter saying there was a warrant out for my arrest in 
Mississippi. I was proud: I'm an outlaw in the state of Mississippi. It doesn't give me the 
blues at all.

<P>
<CENTER>
<P>
<HR WIDTH 50%>
<H3>
Why I Believe There Will Be Peace in the Mideast
</H3></CENTER>


<P>	Basically, there's fighting and there's fighting. People fight each other, and people 
fight for survival, but everybody's convinced they're right and are going to win, which is 
why they fight. And when you're fighting, it's always good to have people behind you. 
<P>	One day, my friend Jim called me. "You told me you knew an acupuncturist, and 
I'm at my wits' end. I've got a horrible pain in my back that won't go away, and I can't 
sleep." Actually, it was my friend Lin who knew the acupuncturist, and she was in 
Belize, but she was going to be back soon. I told him I'd see what I could do. 
<P>	Lin was back about three days later, and she gave me the number, so I called 
Jim. He sounded worse than three days without sleep would have sounded. "I started 
throwing up the other night and I passed out. Someone got me to the hospital. It's bad. 
Real bad. I've got leukemia."
<P>	When someone tells you something like that, you start making plans to miss him. 
Jim was a Lebanese-American, third-generation, and more a product of growing up in 
Detroit than anything else. A couple of years ago, he'd quit the newspaper, where he'd 
worked with me and Lin, and taken all his savings and gone to Lebanon in search of 
his roots, armed only with the name of a village and a picutre of his grandfather. He'd 
called me from there one night when I wasn't home, and got my answering machine. 
After he hung up, the connection stayed open, and there were all kinds of electronic 
noises and people shouting in Arabic. I saved the tape for a long time. It sounded like 
a phone call from Lebanon should have sounded.
<P>	When he got back, he told me he'd found some cousins, and had almost married 
a Lebanese girl, but hadn't because he wasn't sure she could have lived in America, 
and the idea  had, frankly, scared him. Now he was seeing another Lebanese-
American woman-there are a lot of Lebanese in Texas and Louisiana dating back to 
the years when Louisiana was mostly French-speaking and the second language of 
Lebanon was French. 
<P>	He was at this woman's house; she was nursing him until it was time for him to go 
into the hospital, where they were going to remove his spleen, for some reason. I went 
to see him, and he didn't look good, but not the kind of look you get when you're sick. It 
was the look of someone who's scared. The next day, his mother was due to arrive, 
and then he was going into the hospital.
<P>	The operation was sort of a success. I went to St. David's to see him, and we 
hadn't been talking three minutes when I said something that made him laugh. He 
asked me to leave: when he laughed, it hurt his stitches. This was going to be a long 
recovery if he couldn't laugh, I thought. But in a couple of weeks he was out of the 
hospital, and he called me up. <P>	"You have to help me," he said.
<P>	"Sure, Jim, anything. What do you need?" 
<P>	"I need you to come over for dinner; my mother's cooking Lebanese food, and 
she's going nuts in the kitchen. There's gonna be more food than we can eat." This is 
the sort of help I can always give, so I said yes. 
<P>	Ma Shahin was an ordinary housewife, I guess, but there was a fire in her eyes 
as she dodged around his kitchen and pulled things out of the oven, stirred things, 
poured olive-oil on the hummous, and fried balls of kibbeh. Jim sat in a big chair. 
"How's it going in there?" he asked. "Is there room to move?" I said it looked serious. "I 
told her I'd invite four people. I've got twelve, but I bet there'll still be a lot left over." 
<P>	The dinner was great, of course. Jim's mother acted mad. "Jimmy, you told me 
only four people, and there's more than that!" "Mom, I know you, remember?" We ate 
until we were stuffed. Looking at what was left, I wondered if we could air-lift it to Jim's 
long-lost cousins in the war zone. 
<P>	Jim was still tired, and he chased us out so he could go to bed. I went over to 
thank his mother. "You know, I think Jimmy's going to be all right, or that's what the 
doctors say. But I was so scared for a while. He called me and said 'Mom, you gotta 
come down here,' so the first thing I did was I got a leg of lamb out of the freezer and 
put it at the bottom of my suitcase." "But, we can get lamb down here in Texas," I said. 
She put her fists on her hips and got a resolute expression on her face. "I didn't know 
that, and I thought, why take a chance?" Okay, why indeed?
<P>	Later that night, I realized something: the Israelis were bombing the hell out of the 
Lebanese and vice-versa, but I was raised around Jews, and I suddenly realized that if 
there ever was a stereotypical Jewish Mother Story, it was Ma Shahin packing a leg of 
lamb in her suitcase. Oh, the food might be different, but the whole scene at the 
house, and the whole meal, and, in fact, Jim inviting eight extra people because he 
was terrified by his mother's largesse was all a Jewish Mother Story. If these people 
just realized that they were the same deep down, maybe they'd stop killing each other 
and have dinner. 
<P>	It was touch and go for a long time but it turned out that Jim had a rare, curable 
kind of leukemia that was curable because a Houston oil millionaire had lost his son to 
it and had endowed a foundation to work on a cure. Jim wound up going to Houston for 
a long time, and along the way, two things happened. One, of course, was that he 
began to get better. The other was that he met a wonderful woman from Tyler, Texas, 
the barbeque capitol of the state, and not only married her, but learned how to make 
the best barbeque I've ever had, something he still does. Even so, Jessica wasn't 
allowed to marry him until she learned how to make tabbouleh just right. "You have to 
pull all the stems off the parsley," she told me. "Jim's mother was very adamant about 
that."

